# Sharpmake Performance

Sharpmake was designed to generate quickly project files (.vcxproj, .sln, .csproj, .bff, etc.).  At the same time, Sharpmake is not using declarative language, but is instead a more procedural approach to be much more intuitive for C++ and C# programmers.

We wrote a Python program to generate a dummy code base with a size comparing to a real-life scenario for us.  The .cpp files are empty, since we really want to measure the time taken to generate the projects themselves.  

We developed a small Ruby program to generate a code base with empty .cpp files to compare Sharpmake generation speed with Premake and CMake.  Feel free to improve the script if you consider it should have been done differently.  However, don't ignore that our use case is really to generate projects for all configurations once.  We don't want programmers to regenerate projects each time they alternate between configurations.

Time with example generated by `docs/generate_perf_test.rb`:

| Application | Generation Time|
|------------|-----------|
| Sharpmake: | 9.24 sec. |
| Premake: | 17 min. 19 sec. |
| CMake: | 37 min. |

These results don't include the massive amount of RAM Premake was taking and some issues we had to generate what we wanted with CMake.

These results are showing well the reason of Sharpmake existence.  It seems to be 100-200 times faster than Premake and CMake.  Sharpmake manages to have the ease of use of a programming language like C# while still being a champion in performance. 
